LA-UR-21-29967
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Title: Planning is Key for Storm Water Regulatory Compliance
Author(s): Wheeler, Holly Lynn
Intended for: Slides for subcontractor forum
Issued: 2021-10-07

Disclaimer:
Los Alamos National Laboratory, an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer, is operated by Triad National Security, LLC for the National
Nuclear Security Administration of U.S. Department of Energy under contract 89233218CNA000001. By approving this article, the publisher
recognizes that the U.S. Government retains nonexclusive, royalty-free license to publish or reproduce the published form of this contribution,
or to allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes. Los Alamos National Laboratory requests that the publisher identify this article as
work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy. Los Alamos National Laboratory strongly supports academic freedom
and a researcher's right to publish; as an institution, however, the Laboratory does not endorse the viewpoint of a publication or guarantee its
technical correctness.

Planning is Key for Storm Water Regulatory Compliance
• Most construction projects at LANL are subject to
a EPA regulated storm water discharge permit
(NPDES Construction General Permit)
− Compliance is assessed by Triad through regular site
inspections
• Each identified non-compliance is a regulatory
liability to both the subcontractor & Triad
− Non-compliance can result in regulatory enforcement
such as fines, penalties, and stop work
• In FY 2020, LANL had 26 non-compliances from
subcontractor projects
OFFICIAL USE ONLY 10/7/2021 1

Plan Ahead
• Almost all compliance issues occur due to failure to plan ahead!
− Failure to implement corrective actions within permit timeframes due to lack of planning
and preparedness - #1 reason for non-compliance
− Use of improper or inadequate materials and methods
− Projects aren’t prepared to initiate stabilization when soil disturbance ceases
− Projects don’t adequately schedule storm water requirements into project activities
− Project personnel operate reactively instead of proactively to environmental requirements
OFFICIAL USE ONLY 10/7/2021 2

How To Be Successful
• Include environmental requirements in project planning activities
• Include environmental requirements in your schedule of activities
• Complete the compliance requirements identified in your EXID/PRID
• Be proactive – not reactive!
• Learn the requirements & make plans to comply with them
• Contact the Storm Water Team within the Compliacne Programs Group (EPC-
CP) if you don’t understand the requirements or if you need help!
OFFICIAL USE ONLY 10/7/2021 3